Quick and Dirty GSL Archive Documentation
-----------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Introduction
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This text file explains the format of GSL archive files, as used in Phantasy
Star Online Episodes I & II for the Gamecube (as well as other later versions of
PSO). I'm not sure of any other places where GSL archives are used, but if you
know of any, I'd be interested to know.

The GSL archive file format is a bit of an improvement over the AFS archive
format used by earlier versions of PSO, but still isn't really all that great of
an archive file format. Unlike AFS, GSL archives do store the names of the files
that are contained in the archive. The file table at the beginning of the
archive is of variable length, but doesn't store the number of files contained
within the archive (although, a blank entry in the table signals the end of the
list of files, so this isn't too much of a problem). There is no magic number at
the beginning of the file to identify the archive as a GSL archive. Files are
still padded to 2KiB boundaries, which is enforced by fact that offsets within
the archive are notated in 2KiB chunks in the file table.

Now that the intro is out of the way, onto the file format...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 File Format
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All multi-byte numeric types used in a GSL archive dependent on what version of
the game the archive was created for. Archives created for Gamecube versions of
the game store multi-byte numeric types in Big Endian (PowerPC) byte order,
whereas those made for PSO Blue Burst are in Little Endian (Intel) byte order.
This only applies to the archive container file itself -- individual files may
differ in their byte ordering.

All GSL archives consist of a file table, and the individual files that are
stored in the archive. There is no global file header as there is in an AFS
archive. Files are stored after the file table, one after the other, padded to
2KiB boundaries.

File Table (variable length -- always seems to have a lot of padding, though):
Each entry in the file table is 48 bytes long and is of the following format:
    32 bytes - File Name
        Stored as plain ASCII characters
    4 bytes - Offset within the archive, in 2KiB blocks
    4 bytes - Length of the file, in bytes
    8 bytes - Unused? Always zeroes.

There must be at least one blank entry at the end of the file table to signify
the end of the list. In addition, like the files themselves, this area must be
padded to a 2KiB boundary. PSO seems to have files with much larger tables here
than would otherwise be needed.

Archived Files (variable length):
Each file follows at the positions specified in the file table above. Files are
padded to 2KiB boundaries, as is required by the offset values in the file table
section above.
